docs: add Glossary page (#18187)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/use/core-concepts/glossary.md

Author: Threading https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/18187#issuecomment-1994362355:

> How about if we also add information about recommended rules, code paths, code path analysis, eslint directive comments to enable or disable any rule, espree, sourceCode, estraverse, rule-tester, scope, scope-manager (these are just suggestions).

Yeah it's a good question... I did start writing a bit on scopes and other APIs, but found them to be pretty in-the-weeds. My worry is that many users would see all these "implementation detail" kind of names and get turned away by them. 

If there are any terms anybody wants to press on, I'm up for writing that.

Reviewer: I think for this first version, it's fine to leave those off. I see this PR more as a first step that sets up the infrastructure for the glossary, and then we can build upon that as we need to. 

So, I'm happy with the content for this first version and I'd like to land it so we can then just add things as necessary.

### Config Array

An array of [config objects](#config-object) within a [config file](#config-file-configuration-file).

Each config file exports an array of config objects.
The objects in the array are evaluated in order: later objects may override settings specified in earlier objects.

See [Configuration Files](../configure/configuration-files) for more details.

### Config Object

A [config file](#config-file-configuration-file) entry specifying all of the information ESLint needs to execute on a set files.

Each configuration object may include properties describing which files to run on, how to handle different files types, which [plugins](#plugin) to include, and how to run [rules](#rule).

See [Configuration Files > Configuration Objects](../configure/configuration-files#configuration-objects) for more details.

## E

### ESQuery

The library used by ESLint to parse [selector](#selector) syntax for querying [nodes](#node) in an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).

ESQuery interprets CSS syntax for AST node properties.
Examples of ESQuery selectors include:

* `BinaryExpression`: selects all nodes of type _BinaryExpression_

> * `BinaryExpression[operator=+]`: selects all _BinaryExpression_ nodes whose _operator_ is `+`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `BinaryExpression[operator='+']`: selects all _BinaryExpression_ nodes whose _operator_ is `+`
```

Needs string quotes to be valid.

Note that although ESLint is a [linter](#linter) rather than a formatter, ESLint rules can also apply formatting changes to source code.
See [Formatting (Rule)](#formatting-rule) for more information on formatting rules.

### Formatting (Rule)

A rule that solely targets [formatting](#formatter-tool) concerns, such as semicolons and whitespace.
These rules don't change application logic and are a subset of [Stylistic rules](#stylistic-rule).

ESLint no longer recommends formatting rules and previously deprecated its built-in formatting rules.
ESLint recommends instead using a dedicated formatter such as [Prettier](https://prettier.io) or [dprint](https://dprint.dev).
Alternately, the [ESLint Stylistic project](https://eslint.style) provides formatting-related lint rules.

For more information, see [Deprecation of formatting rules](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules).

## G

### Global Declaration

A description to ESLint of a JavaScript [global variable](#global-variable) that should exist at runtime.

Global declarations inform lint rules that check for proper uses of global variables.

> For example, the [`no-undef` rule](../../rules/no-undef) will create a violation for references to global variables not defined in the configured list of environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the [`no-undef` rule](../../rules/no-undef) will create a violation for references to global variables not defined in the configured list of globals.
```

There are no environments in flat config.

[Config files](#config-file-configuration-file) have globals defined as JavaScript objects.

For information about configuring globals, see [Configure Language Options > Specifying Globals](../configure/language-options#specifying-globals).

### Global Variable

A runtime variable that exists in the global scope, meaning all modules and scripts have access to it.

Global variables in JavaScript are declared on the `globalThis` object (generally aliased as `global` in Node.js and `window` in browsers).

You can let ESLint know which global variables your code uses with [global declarations](#global-declaration).

## I

### Inline Config (Configuration Comment)

A source code comment that configures a rule to a different severity and/or set of options.

> Inline configs use similar same syntax as [config files](#config-file-configuration-file) to specify any number of rules by name, their new severity, and optionally new options for the rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inline configs use similar syntax as [config files](#config-file-configuration-file) to specify any number of rules by name, their new severity, and optionally new options for the rules.
```

I'm guessing "same" is extra here.

ESLint is a commonly used linter for JavaScript and other web technologies.

Note that a _linter_ is separate from [formatters](#formatter-tool) and [type checkers](#type-checker).

### Logical Rule

A [rule](#rule) that inspects how code operates to find problems.

Many logical rules look for likely crashes (e.g. [`no-undef`](../../rules/no-undef)), unintended behavior (e.g. [`no-sparse-arrays`](../../rules/no-sparse-arrays)), and unused code (e.g [`no-unused-vars`](../../rules/no-unused-vars)),

You can see the full list of logical rules that ship with ESLint under [Rules > Possible Problems](../../rules/#possible-problems)

## N

### Node

A section of code within an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).

Each node represents a type of syntax found in source code.
For example, the `1 + 2` in the AST for `1 + 2;` is a _BinaryExpression_.

See [#esquery](#esquery) for the library ESLint uses to parse [selectors](#selector) that allow [rules](#rule) to search for nodes.

## O

### Override

When a [config object](#config-object) or [inline config](#inline-config-configuration-comment) sets a new severity and/or rule options that supersede previously set severity and/or options.

> The following [config file](#config-file-configuration-file) overrides `no-unused-expression` from `"error"` to `"off"` in `*.test.js` files:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following [config file](#config-file-configuration-file) overrides `no-unused-expressions` from `"error"` to `"off"` in `*.test.js` files:
```

```js
export default [

>   rules: {
>     "no-unused-expressions": "off"
>   },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  {
    rules: {
      "no-unused-expressions": "error"
    }
  },
```

Missing object `{}`, and per the description the severity should be `"error"` (so that the next object overrides it from `"error"` to `"off"`).

  {
    files: ["*.test.js"],
    rules: {
        "no-unused-expressions": "off"
    }
  }
];
```

> The following [inline config](#inline-config-configuration-comment) sets

Reviewer 2: Something is missing here?

### Processor

A part of a plugin that extracts JavaScript code from other kinds of files, then lets ESLint lint the JavaScript code.

For example, [`eslint-plugin-markdown`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-plugin-markdown) includes a processor that converts the text of <code>```</code> code blocks in Markdown files into code that can be linted.

For more information on configuring processor, see [Plugins > Specify a Processor](../configure/plugins#specify-a-processor).

## R

### Report

A collection of [violations](#violation) from a single ESLint run.

When ESLint runs on source files, it will pass an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) for each source file to each configured [rule](#rule).
The collection of violations from each of the rules will be packaged together and passed to a [formatter](#formatter-linting) to be presented to the user.

### Rule

Code that checks an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) for expected patterns. When a rule's expectation is not met, it creates a [violation](#violation).

ESLint provides a large collection of rules that check for common JavaScript code issues.
Many more rules may be loaded in by [plugins](#plugin).

> For an overview of rules provided, see [Core Concepts > Rules](../core-concepts#rules).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an overview of rules provided, see [Core Concepts > Rules](../core-concepts/#rules).
```

### Severity

What level of reporting a rule is configured to run, if at all.

ESLint supports three levels of severity:

* `"off"` (`0`): Do not run the rule.
* `"warn"` (`1`): Run the rule, but don't exit with a non-zero status code based on its violations (excluding the [`--max-warnings` flag](../command-line-interface#--max-warnings))
* `"error"` (`2`): Run the rule, and exit with a non-zero status code if it produces any violations

For documentation on configuring rules, see [Configure Rules](../configure/rules).

### Shareable Config (Configuration)

A module that provides a predefined [config file](#config-file-configuration-file) configurations.

Shareable configs can configure all the same information from config files, including [plugins](#plugin) and [rules](#rule).

Shareable configs are often provided alongside [plugins](#plugin).
Many plugins provide configs with names like _"recommended"_ that enable their suggested starting set of rules.
For example, [`eslint-plugin-solid`](https://github.com/solidjs-community/eslint-plugin-solid) provides a shareable recommended config:

```js

> import solid from "eslint-plugin-solid/configs/recommended";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import js from "@eslint/js";
import solid from "eslint-plugin-solid/configs/recommended";
```

Since it's used in the config below.

---
title: Glossary
eleventyNavigation:
    key: glossary
    title: Glossary
    parent: core concepts
---

This page serves as a reference for common terms associated with ESLint.

## A

### Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)

A structured representation of code syntax.

Each section of source code in an AST is referred to as a [node](#node).
Each node may have any number of properties, including properties that store children nodes.

The AST format used by ESLint is the standard [ESTree](#estree) format.

ESLint [rules](#rule) are given an AST and may produce [violations](#violation) on parts of the AST when they detect a [violation](#violation).

## C

### Config File (Configuration File)

A file containing settings for how ESLint should parse files into and run [rules](#rule).

> ESLint currently supports two file systems:

Author: Rewording to just mention the current config system here.

I think it'd still be good to have explicit mentions of "flat" and "legacy" as terms. Other writers have already written a lot of resources that refer to those terms for configs, and users will be coming to this page to learn what they mean. Are you opposed to having `### Flat Config` and `### Legacy Config` entries?

> * ["Flat" config](#flat-config) (current): `eslint.config.(c|m)js` specifying all settings for a project. See [Configuration Files (New)](../configure/configuration-files).

Author: Good question... Going with "preferences" for now, as "options" is overloaded by rule options.

## F

### Fix

An optional augmentation to a [rule](#rule) [violation](#violation) that describes how to automatically correct the violation.

Fixes are generally "safe" to apply automatically: they shouldn't cause code behavior changes.
ESLint will apply all fixes in a [report](#report) when run with the `--fix` flag.
Fixes may also be triggered in common editor extensions.

Rule violations may also include file changes that are unsafe and not automatically applied in the form of [suggestions](#suggestion).

### Flat Config

The current configuration file format for ESLint.

The ["Legacy" config format](#legacy-config) allowed nesting configuration files in sub-directories within a project.
"Flat" config files are named as such because all nesting must be done in one configuration file.

Flat config files are named in the format `eslint.config.(c|m)?js`.

You can read more about the motivations behind flat configurations in [ESLint's new config system, Part 2: Introduction to flat config](https://eslint.org/blog/2022/08/new-config-system-part-2).

### Formatter (Linting)

A package that presents the [report](#report) generated by ESLint.

> ESLint ships with several built-in reporters, including `json`, `stylish` (default), and `tap`.

Author: ...oh, funny, I was the author of the PR. #17531

For more information, see [Formatters](../formatters).

### Formatter (Tool)

A [static analysis](#static-analysis) tool that quickly reformats code without changing its logic or names.

Formatters generally only modify the "trivia" of code, such as semicolons, spacing, newlines, and whitespace in general.
Trivia changes generally don't modify the [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) of code.

Common formatters in the ecosystem include [Prettier](https://prettier.io) or [dprint](https://dprint.dev).

Note that although ESLint is a [linter](#linter) rather than a formatter, ESLint still currently ships with a collection of deprecated [formatting rules](#formatting-rule).

> Formatting rules will be removed in a later major version.

Author: Makes sense, +1 to timeless-ness.

I think it'd still be good to mention that ESLint _used_ to include/recommend formatting rules, for historical purposes. Trying out a phrasing that's more timeless...

### Formatting (Rule)

A rule that solely targets [formatting](#formatter-tool) concerns, such as semicolons and whitespace.
These rules don't change application logic and are a subset of [Stylistic rules](#stylistic-rule).

ESLint's built-in formatting rules are deprecated and will be removed in a later major version.
ESLint recommends instead using a dedicated formatter such as [Prettier](https://prettier.io) or [dprint](https://dprint.dev).
Alternately, the [ESLint Stylistic project](https://eslint.style) provides formatting-related lint rules.

For more information, see [Deprecation of formatting rules](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules).

## G

> ### Global

Reviewer: I feel like this is a bit ambiguous. Maybe we could call this "Global Variable" and explain that global variables in JavaScript are defined on the `globalThis` object by the runtime. Then maybe a separate section of "Global Declaration" where we explain how to declare globals for use in ESLint?

For example, the following inline config comment simultaneously disables the `eqeqeq` rule and sets the `curly` rule to `"error"`:

```js
/* eslint eqeqeq: "off", curly: "error" */
```

For documentation on inline config comments, see [Rules > Using configuration comments](../configure/rules#using-configuration-comments).

## L

### Legacy Config

The previous configuration file format for ESLint, now superseded by ["Flat" config](#flat-config).

Legacy ELSint configurations are named in the format `.eslintrc.*` and allowed to be nested across files within sub-directories in a project.

You can read more about the lifetime of legacy configurations in [ESLint's new config system, Part 1: Background](https://eslint.org/blog/2022/08/new-config-system-part-1).

### Linter

A [static analysis](#static-analysis) tool that can [report](#report) the results from running a set of [rules](#rule) on source code.
Each rule may report any number of [violations](#violation) in the source code.

ESLint is a commonly used linter for JavaScript and other web technologies.

Note that a _linter_ is separate from [formatters](#formatter-tool) and [type checkers](#type-checker).

> ### Logical (Rule)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Logical Rule
```

> A [rule](#rule) that looks at logical issues in code.

Reviewer: For clarity:

```suggestion
A [rule](#rule) that inspects how code functions to find problems.
```

Author: I like this change, though I'm concerned that _"functions"_ is an overloaded term. Maybe: _"operates"_?

Author: Ah, I like https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/18187/files#r1530870023 a lot. Will re-use that.

Many logical rules look for likely crashes (e.g. [`no-undef`](../../rules/no-undef)), unintended behavior (e.g. [`no-sparse-arrays`](../../rules/no-sparse-arrays)), and unused code (e.g [`no-unused-vars`](../../rules/no-unused-vars)),

You can see the full list of logical rules that ship with ESLint under [Rules > Possible Problems](../../rules/#possible-problems)

## N

### Node

A section of code within an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).

> Each node has a node type representing its type of syntax.
> For example, the `1 + 2` in the AST for `1 + 2;` is a _BinaryExpression_.

Reviewer: The wording here doesn't seem quite right. maybe this?
```suggestion
Each node represents a type of syntax found in source code.
For example, the `1 + 2` in the AST for `1 + 2;` is a _BinaryExpression_.
```

> ESLint uses the [ESQuery](#esquery) format for its AST and [selectors](#selector).

Reviewer: This seems out of place here. I'm not sure what it's trying to convey in relation to the term "Node"

## O

### Override

> When a [config file](#config-file-configuration-file) sets a new severity and/or rule options for a rule in a set of files.

Reviewer: More accurate to say when a config object or configuration comment specifies a severity or options that supersede previously set severity or options.

Overrides are supported in both configuration formats.

The following [flat config](#flat-config) overrides `no-unused-expression` from `"error"` to `"off"` in `*.test.js` files:

```js
export default [
  rules: {
    "no-unused-expressions": "off"
  },
  {
    files: ["*.test.js"],
    rules: {
        "no-unused-expressions": "off"
    }
  }
];
```

...and the following [legacy config](#flat-config) also overrides `no-unused-expression` from `"error"` to `"off"` in `*.test.js` files:

```js
{
  "rules": {
    "no-unused-expressions": "off"
  },
  "overrides": [
    {
      "files": ["*.test.js"],
      "rules": {
        "no-unused-expressions": "off"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Overrides are much simpler in flat configs, as flat configs declare all rules in one file rather than allowing nested hierarchies of configs the way legacy configs do.

For more information on overrides in legacy configs, see [Configuration Files (Deprecated) > How to overrides work?](../configure/configuration-files-deprecated#how-do-overrides-work).

## P

### Parser

> A package that reads in a string and converts it to an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An object that reads in a string and converts it to an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).
```

Also, not sure how specific you were planning on getting here, but technically a parser in the outside world doesn't have to return an AST. If your intent is to be ESLint-specific, then I might instead say that a parser in ESLint takes in source code and returns an AST.

Author: Yes! +1 to mentioning it's not an ESLint-specific concept. Reworded to mention "a standardized format" and that ESLint specifically asks for an AST.

Custom parsers let ESLint parse non-standard JavaScript syntax.
Often custom parsers are included as part of shareable configurations or plugins, so you don’t have to use them directly.
For example, [@typescript-eslint/parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@typescript-eslint/parser) is a custom parser included in the [typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io) project that lets ESLint parse TypeScript code.

For more information on using parsers with ESLint, see [Configure a Parser](../configure/parser).

### Plugin

A package that can contain a set of [configurations](#shareable-config-configuration), [environments](#environment), [processors](#processor), and/or [rules](#rule).

A popular use case for plugins is to enforce best practices for a framework.
For example, [@angular-eslint/eslint-plugin](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@angular-eslint/eslint-plugin) contains best practices for using the Angular framework.

For more information, refer to [Configure Plugins](../configure/plugins).

### Processor

A part of a plugin that extracts JavaScript code from other kinds of files, then lets ESLint lint the JavaScript code.

> Alternatively, processors can convert JavaScript code during preprocessing.

Reviewer: This isn't very clear. Convert JavaScript into what?

Author: Just removed, I don't think what I was going for here (being thorough in what they can do) actually adds any new info.

For example, [`eslint-plugin-markdown`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-plugin-markdown) includes a processor that converts the text of <code>```</code> code blocks in Markdown files into code that can be linted.

For more information on configuring parsers, see [Plugins > Specify a Processor](../configure/plugins#specify-a-processor).

## R

### Report

A collection of [violations](#violation) from a single ESLint run.

When ESLint runs on source files, it will pass an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) for each source file to each configured [rule](#rule).
The collection of violations from each of the rules will be packaged together and passed to a [formatter](#formatter-linting) to be presented to the user.

### Rule

> A piece of logic that checks [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) for the presence of a code defect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code that checks an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast) for expected patterns. When a rule's expectation is not met, it creates a [violation](#violation).
```

ESLint provides a large collections of rules that check for common JavaScript code issues.

> Many more lint rules may be loaded in by [plugins](#plugin).

Reviewer: We don't appear to use "lint rule" anywhere else.
```suggestion
Many more rules may be loaded in by [plugins](#plugin).
```

For an overview of rules provided, see [Core Concepts > Rules](../core-concepts#rules).

## S

### Selector

> A description of how to search for [nodes](#node) within an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Syntax describing how to search for [nodes](#node) within an [AST](#abstract-syntax-tree-ast).
```

ESLint [rules](#rule) use [ESQuery](#esquery) selectors to find nodes that should be checked.

### Severity

What level of reporting a rule is configured to run, if at all.

> ESLint supports three levels of severity:

Reviewer: Worth mentioning the numeric equivalents?

Author: Aside: I have never seen a use case for those where I've liked the brevity more than I've disliked the lack of clarity...

* `"off"`: Do not run the rule.
* `"warn"`: Run the rule, but don't exit with a non-zero status code based on its violations (excluding the [`--max-warnings` flag](../command-line-interface#--max-warnings))
* `"error"`: Run the rule, and exit with a non-zero status code if it produces any violations

For documentation on configuring rules, see [Configure Rules](../configure/rules).

### Shareable Config (Configuration)

> A module that provides a predefined set of [rule](#rule) configurations.

Reviewer: Shareable configs aren't just rule configurations. They can configure anything you might in a config file.

Shareable configs are often provided alongside [plugins](#plugin).
Many plugins provide configs with names like _"recommended"_ that enable their suggested starting set of rules.
For example, [`eslint-plugin-solid`](https://github.com/solidjs-community/eslint-plugin-solid) provides a shareable recommended config:

```js
import solid from "eslint-plugin-solid/configs/recommended";

export default [js.configs.recommended, solid];
```

For information on shareable configs, see [Share Configurations](../../extend/shareable-configs).

### Static Analysis

> Tooling that analyzes source code without building or running it.

Reviewer: Not technically correct:
```suggestion
The process of analyzing source code without building or running it.
```

> [Linters](#linter) such as ESLint, [formatters](#formatter-tool), and [type checkers](#type-checker) are examples of static analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Linters](#linter) such as ESLint, [formatters](#formatter-tool), and [type checkers](#type-checker) are examples static analysis tools.
```

> Static analysis is different from _dynamic_ analysis, which is tooling that builds and runs source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static analysis is different from _dynamic_ analysis, which is the process of evaluating source code after it is built and executed.
```

Unit, integration, and end-to-end tests are common examples of dynamic analysis.

### Stylistic (Rule)

A rule that enforces a preference rather than a logical issue.
Stylistic areas include [Formatting rules](#formatting-rule), naming conventions, and consistent choices between equivalent syntaxes.

ESLint's built-in stylistic rules are feature frozen frozen: except for supporting new ECMAScript versions, they won't receive new features.

For more information, see [Changes to our rules policies](https://eslint.org/blog/2020/05/changes-to-rules-policies) and [Deprecation of formatting rules](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules).

### Suggestion

> An optional augmentation to a [rule](#rule) [violation](#violation) that describes how one way to manually adjust the code to improve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An optional augmentation to a [rule](#rule) [violation](#violation) that describes how one may manually adjust the code to address the violation.
```

> Suggestions are not generally "safe" to apply automatically: they cause code behavior changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suggestions are not generally safe to apply automatically because they cause code behavior changes.
```

> ESLint will only apply suggestions when run via an integration such as an editor extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ESLint does not apply suggestions directly but does provide suggestion to integrations that may choose to apply suggestions (such as an editor extension).
```

];
```

See [Configuration Files (New)](../configure/configuration-files) for more details.

### Config Array

An array of [config objects](#config-object) within a [config file](#config-file-configuration-file).

Each config file exports an array of config objects.
The objects in the array are evaluated in order: later objects may override settings specified in earlier objects.

> See [Configuration Files (New)](../configure/configuration-files) for more details.

Reviewer: No longer (New) on main

```suggestion
See [Configuration Files](../configure/configuration-files) for more details.
```

ESLint no longer recommends formatting rules and previously deprecated its built-in formatting rules.
ESLint recommends instead using a dedicated formatter such as [Prettier](https://prettier.io) or [dprint](https://dprint.dev).
Alternately, the [ESLint Stylistic project](https://eslint.style) provides formatting-related lint rules.

For more information, see [Deprecation of formatting rules](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules).

## G

### Global Declaration

A description to ESLint of a JavaScript [global variable](#global-variable) that should exist at runtime.

Global declarations inform lint rules that check for proper uses of global variables.
For example, the [`no-undef` rule](../../rules/no-undef) will create a violation for references to global variables not defined in the configured list of environments.

[Config files](#config-file-configuration-file) have globals defined as JavaScript objects.

For information about configuring globals, see [Configure Language Options > Specifying Globals](../configure/language-options#specifying-globals).

### Global Variable

> A runtime variable that is declared "globally", meaning all modules and scripts have access to it.
> 
> JavaScript allows declaring global variables on the `globalThis` object (generally aliased as `global` in Node.js and `window` in browsers).
> 
> ESLint can be informed of those global variables with [global declarations](#global-declaration).
> 

Reviewer: Just a bit of cleanup.
```suggestion
A runtime variable that exists in the global scope, meaning all modules and scripts have access to it.

Global variables in JavaScript are declared on the `globalThis` object (generally aliased as `global` in Node.js and `window` in browsers).

You can let ESLint know which global variables your code uses with [global declarations](#global-declaration).
```
